Concepts: data node (#385)
vegaprotocol/documentation: docs/concepts/vega-chain/network.md

## Spam protection
On a decentralised and pseudonymous network, there's always a possibility that a malicious actor will attempt to spam blocks and fill them with meaningless transactions. To mitigate that risk, there are spam protections enabled to protect the Vega network, in particular enforced minimums and maximums for transactions sent to the Vega network, and a client-side proof of work requirement to mitigate transaction spam.

The values of all spam protection network parameters can be changed through a governance vote. If a parameter change passes governance, it takes effect in the epoch after it passes.

<!-- link to governance -->

### Proof of work 
Although Vega is a proof-of-stake network, there is a client-side proof-of-work mechanism to prevent transaction spam from public keys trying to flood the network, or submitting a number of transactions that could slow down the network for all participants. The proof-of-work is calculated by the Vega wallet. It does not incur gas fees and does not have any effect on a transaction's priority.

> Every transaction must include a proof-of-work calculation derived from a recent block, proving the transaction was created recently. If a public key submits transactions above the maximum set by the network parameter (<NetworkParameter frontMatter={frontMatter} param="spam.pow.numberOfTxPerBlock" hideValue={true} />), the difficulty of the PoW increases and the proof will take longer to calculate, i.e., transactions will take longer to be generated but can still be included in a block.

Reviewer: >If a public key submits transactions above the maximum set by the network parameter

This needs to be clearer that this refers to the number of transactions whose proof of work is based on a given block. 

>the difficulty of the PoW increases

This is only true if the network parameter for increaseDifficulty is not 0.

Author: Thanks - suggested changes below :)

It's possible to submit a large volume of transactions at one time, as long as the proof-of-work is calculated by the wallet adequately.

> A transaction with a missing or incorrect proof is rejected, as is any transaction that uses an already-used PoW calculation. A public key that sends transactions with faulty proof-of-work calculations is banned for 30 seconds or 1/48th of an epoch, whichever is greater.

Reviewer: missing or incorrect proof is rejected but is rejected before a transaction is added to a block so it can't cause a party to be banned.

See a full list of the network parameters used for PoW in the [spam protection parameters table](#spam-protection-parameters).

:::note Go deeper
[Spam protection PoW ↗](https://github.com/vegaprotocol/specs/blob/master/protocol/0072-SPPW-spam-protection-PoW.md): Read the spec for implementation details and how this mechanism works in particular circumstances.
:::

### Spam policy enforcement
Messages that don't follow the anti-spam rules are rejected, either pre- or post-block.

> Pre-block rejection: A transaction is rejected before it enters the validators' mempool. The case for a rejection can only be determined based on transactions that were in the previous block, and not on any other transactions received by a validator but not yet put into a block. Once a block is scheduled, all transactions in the mempool are verified. If a transaction fails the applicable spam rules set by the [parameters](#spam-protection-parameters) below, it's not processed and is removed.

Reviewer: >Once a block is scheduled, all transactions in the mempool are verified

that's not true (or accurate). Transactions are pre-block checked for spam **before being added** to the mempool. The remaining transactions that were not selected for a block are rechecked after the block execution.

Author: Ok, I think I see where I've misinterpreted, but I want to check, is this part of the spec below true, @ze97286?: 

> Once a block is scheduled, all validators also test all transactions in their mempool if they are still passing the test, and remove them otherwise.

> Post-block rejection: A transaction makes it into the block, but is rejected before it's passed to the application layer. This allows for more fine-grained policies because more information is available, but the offending transaction will take up space in the block. If a transaction fails the spam rules set by the [parameters](#spam-protection-parameters) below, it is rejected and may trigger a spam proof of work threshold increase.

Reviewer: >it is rejected and may trigger a spam proof of work threshold increase

the first part is correct, the second is not. It may cause the party to be banned and it may increase the min token requirement for submitting transactions but it may not do anything to pow threshold.

Author: @ze97286 Min token requirement is just increased for the individual pubkey, right?

> Post-block rejection: A transaction makes it into the block, but is rejected before it's passed to the application layer. This allows for more fine-grained policies because more information is available, but the offending transaction will take up space in the block. If a transaction fails the spam rules set by the [parameters](#spam-protection-parameters) below, it is rejected and may trigger a spam proof of work threshold increase.

Author: ```suggestion
Post-block rejection: A transaction makes it into the block, but is rejected before it's passed to the application layer. This allows for more fine-grained policies because more information is available, but the offending transaction will take up space in the block. If a transaction fails the spam rules set by the [parameters](#spam-protection-parameters) below, it is rejected. The party may be banned, and the minimum token requirement for submitting transactions may be increased.
```

These limits are adjustable, so each network can be set up for maximum flexibility, and offer tokenholders the chance to change the values of those limits through network parameter governance.

These limits are not totally dissimilar to the spam controls that are also implemented, which aim to mitigate the possibility of malicious actors deliberately flooding the system with junk requests. 

### Maximum pegged orders and liquidity commitment shapes
Currently, two transaction types can be limited:
* Total number of pegged orders on all active markets: controlled by network parameter <NetworkParameter frontMatter={frontMatter} param="limits.markets.maxPeggedOrders" />
* Number of offsets in each liquidity commitment order shape (per side), controlled by <NetworkParameter frontMatter={frontMatter} param="market.liquidityProvision.shapes.maxSize" />

If either parameter's value is decreased (through a governance proposal and vote), then the change does not affect existing orders on the market, but only new orders/liquidity commitments placed after the change is enacted. 

> ## Spam protection

Reviewer: with all this talk about spam protection is it worth mentioning the spam statistics API? are they mentioned elsewhere? is it mentioned anywhere what guarantees does the wallet give you with regard to spam?

Author: as discussed off gh but here for posterity - I've added a tip box about the spam stats API, and will cover the wallet enhancements once they're merged

* Maximum number of nominations per public key, per epoch is determined by the network parameter <NetworkParameter frontMatter={frontMatter} param="spam.protection.max.delegations"/>. Once that nominations limit is reached for a key, any subsequent nominations are rejected until the epoch switches over.

#### Rejection policies
Relevant transactions (governance, transfers, and staking) that don't follow the anti-spam rules are rejected, either before the block is processed, or after, depending on the circumstances.

**Pre-block rejection:** Each governance transaction is checked to ensure the public key sending it meets the spam protection requirements before the transaction enters the validators' mempool. The remaining transactions that were not added to a block are rechecked after the original block's execution, to be added to the next block. If a transaction fails the applicable spam rules set by the [parameters](#spam-protection-and-pow-parameters) below, it's not processed and is removed.

> **Post-block rejection:** When a transaction makes it into the block, it is still checked before the block is finalised, and can then be rejected before it's passed to the application layer. A transaction may be rejected post-block and passed the initial validation if, for example, it breaches the maximum allowed rule, but nodes aren't yet aware of how many of that party's transactions will eventually be included in a block. That can happen because a validator node doesn't know what's in the other validators' mempools until transactions reach them through gossip. When the nodes evaluate a block during its execution, all mempool and transaction information is available, so any transactions that breach those spam rules are rejected and removed from the block before they can be executed.

Reviewer: The first half of the sentence is inaccurate - essentially mempool are not part of this.

> When the nodes evaluate a block during its execution, all mempool and transaction information is available, so any transactions that breach those spam rules are rejected and removed from the block before they can be executed.

When blocks are executed, we have all the information from before the block + all transactions already seen within the block _so any transactions that breach those spam rules are rejected and removed from the block before they can be executed._

| spam.pow.numberOfPastBlocks         	| To compute the wallet transaction quota, transactions can be assigned to past blocks; this parameter defines how far back that goes | <NetworkParameter frontMatter={frontMatter} param="spam.pow.numberOfPastBlocks" hideName={true} />

## Network restarts: Checkpoints
The network's validators periodically store checkpoints of all important state parameters such as balances and governance proposals. 

Checkpoints allow the chain to be restarted from a previously valid state in the event of consensus failure, a network restart, or a critical issue being discovered.

Those checkpoints happen at defined intervals, and on every deposit and withdrawal request. 

### How a checkpoint is created and used
1. Each validator node calculates the hash of the checkpoint file and then sends this through consensus to ensure all the nodes in the network agree on the state. A checkpoint file is then automatically produced and saved with a hash. 

> 2. When a network is taken down, the checkpoint file's hash is added to the genesis block. A node operator updates the genesis file in the networks repo with the network's new start date, the new network ID, and the hash of the checkpoint file to be used in the network restoration. Once the file is updated, the node operators manually approve the change, and then one validator submits the restore transaction with the relevant checkpoint file.

Reviewer: this is no longer true. There is no checkpoint restore command. The checkpoint data is embedded in the genesis file.

3. At network start-up, a validator submits a restore transaction with the checkpoint file. 
4. All other validators verify the checkpoint against their own. If the hash does not match, the transaction will have no effect. If the genesis file still has a previous state hash, all transactions will be rejected until the restore transaction arrives and is processed. If the hash matches, the network will be restored with the state and then allow other transactions on the network.

### Validator scores in a restart
The protocol needs a way to allow validators to continue initiating a restart, even before all information has been restored. 

Each checkpoint includes the node IDs of all consensus, standby, and candidate validator nodes and their scores. 

> When initiating the restart all the nodes participating will temporarily be given the same Tendermint weight, which is used until the checkpoint has been fully processed. At that point, the weights are recalculated based on their state at the time the checkpoint was taken, and validators' scores are updated. 

Reviewer: again, no longer true.

| spam.pow.increaseDifficulty           | If a wallet exceeds the max transactions per block, the difficulty of the PoW increases by this factor | <NetworkParameter frontMatter={frontMatter} param="spam.pow.increaseDifficulty" hideName={true} />
| spam.pow.numberOfPastBlocks         	| To compute the wallet transaction quota, transactions can be assigned to past blocks; this parameter defines how far back that goes | <NetworkParameter frontMatter={frontMatter} param="spam.pow.numberOfPastBlocks" hideName={true} />

## Loading network state: Snapshots

> To allow a Vega node to be restarted without the need to replay the whole blockchain, a Vega node can load an existing snapshot created by a different node, which will populate all the network state. The node can then resume listening to blocks after the snapshot, until it gets to the live block height, at which point it will be able to contribute to the chain.

Reviewer 2: I'd say "node" state instead of "network" state.

Reviewer 2: "resume listening to blocks after the snapshot, until ..."

I'd say 

"downloads and replays blocks from the height corresponding to snapshot, until ..."

:::note Try it out
Node operators can refer to [how to use snapshots](../../node-operators/how-to/use-snapshots.md) for a step-by-step guide on loading network state with snapshots. 
:::

> ## Network restarts: Checkpoints

Reviewer 2: "Checkpoints" I like to say LNL Checkpoints to make it even more different from Snapshots to disambiguate.
